URL: https://connect.geant.org/2025/06/10/geant-community-committee-gcc-chair-charlie-van-genuchten-sparks-change-for-gender-equality-and-diversity-within-the-community
TITLE: GÉANT Community Committee (GCC) Chair Charlie van Genuchten sparks change for gender equality and diversity within the community

Charlie van Genuchten was elected as the GCC Chair on 20 November 2024. Senior Product Manager for Security at the Dutch NREN
SURF
, Charlie will lead the GCC for the next three years. Six months into her role, Charlie reflects on the changes she is beginning to implement, and the impact she hopes the GCC will have in strengthening the community. The GCC will be present at the
Community Hub
throughout TNC25 if you would like to learn more.
What value does the GCC bring to the GÉANT community?
The election of new GCC members will enhance the committee’s representation of our community through greater diversity, allowing it to build on the commendable work of the previous GCC. We can promote the combination of different activities carried out within the community successfully due to the wide range of knowledge and links to various
thematic areas
which now make up the GCC. In May, the
GÉANT Community Programme (GCP)
workshop was held to ensure everyone has the opportunity to communicate with one another about how we can work together and knowledge share to ensure the GCP is efficient and collaborative. The GCC acts as the motor to keep progressing and to follow up on actions agreed from these discussions. Acting link as between the community, the
General Assembly (GA)
and the
Board of Directors
, the GCC is responsible for ensuring there is clear communication between one another, improving synergy within the community. There may be challenges the community are aware of on the strategic side, which the GA can then be notified of, and vice versa, therefore having a consistent flow of communication is key. The
GÉANT Innovation Programme
is another significant focus of the GCC which will evolve over the coming years, along with the GCC.
How is the GCC integrating new technology areas into its activities?
With the addition of various new technology-focused Special Interest Groups (SIGs) over the past year, including
SIG-AI
,
SIG-Quantum
, and
SIG-TFN
, it is incredible to see the developments we are working towards as a community to explore these areas, and collaborate with likeminded peers. Introducing new SIGs has enabled us to look at these topics in a holistic approach and identify gaps in the themes we are addressing.
Within the next three years, what changes do you want to see from the GCC?
The end goal is for the GCC to become more transparent, and to hold accountability for any changes we put in place. We want people to know how to reach out to us and contribute, ensuring they have a full understanding about various processes within the GCP, such as
how to apply to become a member of the GCC
.
The GÉANT Community needs to reach out to new and more diverse audiences. How do you see the GCC doing that?
Now that the GCC is more representative, I hope many will feel more comfortable to collaborate on various topics. In addition to this, having consistent communication with the GA ensures there is efficient use of resources for SIG activities to ensure as many participants can attend as they wish. As a community, I hope that the younger generation are aware they shouldn’t feel this way, either individually or alongside a regular participant from the same NREN. We want to encourage young professionals to have an equal opportunity to attend these meetings and experience the innovation first hand.
Have you seen behaviours and attitudes changing since the introduction of the Code of Conduct and the Gender Equality Principles, or is there still work to do?
I believe barriers regarding gender equality are being addressed much more than previous years, and the new GCC members are representing this with a good balance of gender and age. In terms of what we can do more, the
Code of Conduct
can be increasingly reinforced within the community. Everyone is entitled to feel safe and at home within our community at all events, in every moment. This is the base line requirement to ensure our community can grow and all voices are included. The seven
Gender Equality Principles
were developed by the GÉANT Community with the intention of endorsement from organisations within the community.
As a woman in STEM, what advice would you give to the next generation of women in STEM?
Always believe your voice is worth hearing. I’m unsure how the current younger generation encounter the world, however my experience as a young girl growing up involved feeling like my opinion was worth less than a man’s. Especially when working in a male dominated field, and coming from a non-technical background, many women like myself may assume that their knowledge is limited in comparison. This can lead to women feeling they must simply nod and smile, refraining from participating in innovative conversations. I hope for the younger generation they are aware they shouldn’t feel this way. Let your voice be heard because it is worth hearing. Since experiencing this feeling as a young woman, I have learnt to speak up because most people want to hear from you, especially within our community. Sometimes it is the voice in your own head which is your biggest barrier.
What is your favourite thing about TNC?
All of it! It’s great to see everyone, engage with community members, and meet new people. In comparison to other community meetings,
TNC
provides a unique environment where I can explore subject matters which differ from my usual focus areas. I enjoy learning about exciting networking projects, and new innovations from the community, especially those that bring connectivity to remote places.
This article is featured on CONNECT49, the latest issue of the GÉANT CONNECT Magazine!
Read the full online magazine here
Tags
Community Programme
GCC
GÉANT Community Committee