URL: https://connect.geant.org/2025/06/10/emerging-nren-programme-empowerment-and-impact
TITLE: Emerging NREN Programme: empowerment and impact

We spoke with Elisantila Gaci, Head of the Services and Development Department at
RASH
—Albania’s National Research and Education Network – about her experience with the GÉANT Emerging NREN Programme (ENP). She reflected on how the programme influenced her career and how it continues to support both her and RASH in advancing research and education in Albania.
Elisantila, how did it all start? How did you join the ENP?
When I joined RASH in 2013, I was already working on initiatives to drive digital transformation in Albania’s higher education sector. In 2022, inspired by the support of GÉANT colleagues who understand the transformative power of regional collaboration and capacity-building, I applied to join the ENP. I was captivated by the programme’s emphasis on the empowerment of professionals from developing NRENs and its dedication to promoting gender inclusion in the tech and research sectors: both causes that deeply resonate with me. I subsequently submitted a proposal for a Lightning Talk at TNC22 (13–17 June, Trieste, Italy), about my journey in community engagement. I was honoured to be selected as a speaker. This opportunity was a turning point in my career. The ENP opened doors for me to grow professionally, build connections with peers from around the world, and be part of this unique community.
What skills or experiences from your participation in the programme did you find especially valuable in your career development?
The programme helped me grow both technically and personally. I improved my soft skills, so important for leadership and collaboration, while gaining a deeper understanding of NREN operations, project management practices, and the dynamics of the GÉANT Project. But the real impact came from the human connections. I built lasting relationships with mentors and peers from the international NREN community, these connections broadened my perspective. The mentorship offered by the ENP helped me find my voice, communicate ideas more clearly, and gain the confidence to take a more active role in collaborative work.
What were some of the unexpected lessons you learned during your involvement in the programme?
One of the biggest lessons was how much innovation can come from collaboration. I realised that even small NRENs can lead impactful projects when they tap into a broader community. I also learned the importance of adaptability; many challenges we discussed during the programme required flexible thinking and creative problem-solving. Another unexpected takeaway was how empowering it is to be part of a diverse group where each voice is truly heard and valued.
As a woman in STEM, what can organisations and educational institutions do to encourage more women to pursue careers in technology,especially in your field?
When organisations shine a light on the achievements of women in tech, they create role models who inspire the next generation to believe, “I can do that too.” Mentorship has the power to transform lives; it provides guidance, confidence, and connection, especially in fields where women remain underrepresented. Building inclusive, supportive environments where women feel seen, heard, and valued can unlock potential, and will ultimately improve society. But this must begin early. We need to partner with schools and universities to champion STEM education among young women. Organisations should integrate gender equity into every aspect of recruitment, development, and leadership.
What’s around the corner for Elisantila?
I see a future filled with opportunities and growth. As collaboration across NRENs becomes more vital than ever, I see my role evolving to help shape the next generation of digital infrastructure, support innovation, and promote inclusivity in the research and education landscape.
About Elisantila
Elisantila Gaci is Head of the Services and Development Department at RASH, the National Research and Education Network of Albania. Her involvement with the Albanian Academic Network began during her studies at the Polytechnic University of Tirana. In 2019, she joined the GÉANT Project. She later served as Product Manager for the WiFiMon project, leading development efforts until the project’s retirement. Since then, she has been actively involved in several key initiatives, including
perfSONAR
, Software Governance, and the Network Automation eAcademy. Elisantila has been playing an active role in supporting Albania’s participation in the GÉANT Project. In 2022 she was selected for the Emerging NREN Programme, where she focused on enhancing cross-border collaboration and promoting digital innovation in research and education.
This article is featured on CONNECT49, the latest issue of the GÉANT CONNECT Magazine!
Read the full online magazine here
Tags
Emerging NREN Programme
RASH