URL: https://connect.geant.org/2025/06/10/egi-powering-open-science-through-federated-digital-infrastructure
TITLE: EGI: powering Open Science through federated digital infrastructure

As science grows more data-driven and interdisciplinary, researchers across Europe need reliable, scalable, and collaborative digital tools to translate complexity into discovery.
EGI
plays a key role in this transformation by delivering an open, federated infrastructure that accelerates data-intensive science and enables a truly collaborative European Research Area, leveraging national and local investments from its 28 members. EGI’s global dimension extends to both providers and users. With strategic partnerships across Europe, America, Asia, Africa, and Oceania, it has established collaborations covering 42 countries. This worldwide network serves +100,000 researchers from over 150 countries, providing computing and data infrastructure for international scientific collaboration. The access to +200 research data centres is federated in EGI to constitute the EGI infrastructure, a hyperscale compute facility that is critical to the excellence of European research communities across all scientific disciplines, made possible by the GÉANT connectivity services.
EGI provides advanced computer and data services across national and thematic boundaries, supporting thousands of researchers in disciplines ranging from high-energy physics and climate science to health and digital humanities. By federating Cloud and High-Throughput Computing (HTC) resources alongside advanced data storage, management, and other technical capabilities, EGI enables researchers to move seamlessly between digital environments, provide free access to their data and analytics tools, and accelerate data-intensive science.
In collaboration with thematic Research Infrastructures and e-Infrastructure EGI enables
Open Science
— a central objective of the European Research Area’s Action 1 and the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) by facilitating the reuse of large key research datasets and by providing technical federating solutions for the implementation of the EOSC federation. EGI empowers researchers to go beyond access: to fully
exploit
data in ways that are reproducible, secure, and scalable.
At the heart of EGI’s mission is the vision of the
Open Science Commons
— a model that treats key research assets (data, software, compute, expertise) as shared resources governed collaboratively. This principle helps democratise access to digital capabilities and promotes a strong culture of co-development and reciprocity — aligned with the GÉANT community’s values of openness, interoperability, and trust.
Looking ahead, EGI is evolving to meet the demands of new scientific frontiers — from digital twins to AI-powered platforms.
For more information about EGI, visit their website at
www.egi.eu
!
This article is featured on CONNECT49, the latest issue of the GÉANT CONNECT Magazine!
Read the full online magazine here
Tags
e-infrastructures
e-Infrastructures Assembly
EGI