URL: https://connect.geant.org/2025/06/10/driving-digital-innovation-bella-iis-experimental-platforms
TITLE: Driving digital innovation: BELLA II’s experimental platforms

Imagine a digital laboratory that tests the boldest ideas before they transform the real world. Today, that laboratory exists in Latin America and the Caribbean. It comes in the form of new testbeds launched by the
BELLA II project
, a cutting-edge initiative led by
RedCLARA
and co-funded by the European Union, placing the region on the path to global technological innovation.
With the deployment of specialized environments focused on blockchain, cybersecurity, and high-performance computing (HPC), BELLA II has taken a significant step toward building a collaborative, secure technological infrastructure aimed at solving real-world challenges in key sectors such as science, education, digital government, and industry.
Two of these testbeds — blockchain and HPC — have been operational since 2024, while a third, focused on cybersecurity, is currently under development. All of them have been designed as controlled experimentation spaces where researchers, developers, and institutions can validate complex technological solutions under realistic conditions, minimizing risks and costs before large-scale deployment.
Not only are these environments designed for major institutions, but they also provide opportunities for emerging innovators. For example, in one Latin American country, a group of computer engineering students might use BELLA II’s blockchain testbed to develop and test an application for tracking organic food. Their solution is to guarantee the origin of products from the farm to the point of sale. This testbed allowed them to experiment with smart contracts, fine-tune system performance, and identify vulnerabilities in a realistic and secure setting. This hands-on experience enhances the project’s technical quality, strengthens new talent training, and connects them with regional collaboration networks.
Collaborative ecosystems are driving regional innovation
These testbeds are the result of coordinated efforts among strategic actors in the digital ecosystem: LACNET, the region’s permissioned public blockchain network; SCALAC, the high-performance computing network for Latin America and the Caribbean; Ciberlac, the Cybersecurity Excellence Network; and Uruguay’s Universidad de la República (Udelar). Together, they have woven a web of capabilities that enables resource sharing, reduces external technological dependence, and fosters innovation from the Global South.
Built on LACNET’s infrastructure, the blockchain testbed provides access to decentralized, transparent, and secure solutions. It allows for simulating applications involving traceability, smart contracts, or digital identities, enabling organizations to validate their functionality before entering production environments.
From climate models to artificial intelligence algorithms, the HPC testbed—managed by SCALAC—supports those who require significant computing power to solve complex problems. This environment promotes regional scientific collaboration and strengthens local capacity in strategic research areas.
Based on the cyber range concept, the cybersecurity testbed is a key tool to improve responses to digital threats. It will allow for attack simulations, the testing of defensive solutions, and team training in controlled scenarios, boosting the region’s resilience to cyberspace’s growing challenges.
You can access the testbeds at
bella-programme.eu/en/results/testbeds
This article is featured on CONNECT49, the latest issue of the GÉANT CONNECT Magazine!
Read the full online magazine here
Tags
BELLA II
CONNECT49
RedCLARA