URL: https://connect.geant.org/2025/06/10/shaping-a-brighter-future-together-at-tnc25
TITLE: Shaping a brighter future together at TNC25!

This week, GÉANT and the TNC25 host, Jisc, are delighted to welcome over 800 people from all corners of the world in the colourful city of Brighton, UK for TNC25, taking place in the picturesque premises of the Brighton Dome.
About the host
A not-for-profit organisation,
Jisc
is driven by the belief that education and research improves lives, and that technology is key to amplifying that impact. Jisc manages the Janet Network, the UK’s research and education network, securely connecting more than 18 million users. This critical infrastructure underpins collaboration, fuels research breakthroughs, and fosters learning, all the while protected by built-in world-class cybersecurity.
“As the CEO of Jisc, it is my great pleasure to welcome colleagues from around the world to the UK, to Brighton, and to TNC25. We have waited many years to welcome TNC to the UK. COVID restrictions in 2020 and 2021 meant we had to cancel plans, so it is particularly exciting to finally have you all join us on the beautiful south coast.
TNC is a wonderful example of the power of global collaboration and the true value of the NREN community. This event brings together representatives, with a wide range of specialisms, from NRENs across the world, all sharing a commitment to breaking down barriers, deepening our connections and discovering solutions. Jisc is a proud member of this community, and will continue to align ourselves with these commitments to research and education.”
– Heidi Fraser-Krauss, Jisc CEO
What to expect at TNC25
If you are a regular at TNC events, you’ll notice that this year we have introduced a few new features to make TNC25 more dynamic and vibrant. Make sure you enjoy every moment of the week!
TNC is all about making new connections, and there’s no better place to do that than the
TNC Exchange
, a lively, open space featuring partners’ booths, cozy lounge corners, and the TNC Café, powered by Sparkle. Inspired by the colourful and vibrant atmosphere of Brighton, the TNC Exchange is a hub of creativity, collaboration, and knowledge sharing designed around two main lanes: North Lane and South Lane.
Located at the heart of the TNC Exchange, you’ll find this year’s new exciting concept – the
Exchange Theatre
, a dynamic space for learning and collaboration. During breaks, our Gold and Platinum partners will host presentations here using silent disco headsets — so you can tune in without tuning out the buzz around you. Grab your lunch, pop on a headset, and join a session!
Need a pick-me up as you continue to explore the space? Stop by the
TNC Café
, powered by Sparkle, to enjoy a delicious cup of coffee– all right here, in the TNC Exchange.
“TNC25 is all about reconnecting with what makes this event so special: the people. That’s why we’ve come up with new exiting concepts for this year, such as the TNC Exchange, an exciting new space dedicated to spontaneous conversations, big ideas, and meaningful connections. We’re also thrilled to finally take TNC to Brighton! This city bursts with diversity, art, and energy, and our venue is steeped in history and inspiration. I can’t wait to see participants connecting, and truly enjoying the experience we’ve crafted for them.” Steffie Bosman, TNC conference organiser, GÉANT
TNC25 is already underway –
browse the conference programme
here.
The city
Brighton is a vibrant city known for its historic Regency squares, Royal Pavilion, and piers, championing diversity and inclusivity. It’s rich cultural and creative scene means plenty of things to do and see, from art to live music, as well as independent shops and award-winning restaurants.
If you want to experience Brighton like a local, visit the
TNC25 website
to find a link to our highlights, recommendations, and available
discounts
on attractions, activities, and restaurants.
Always bring your conference badge with you to access.
Visit the TNC25 website at
tnc25.geant.org
This article is featured on CONNECT49, the latest issue of the GÉANT CONNECT Magazine!
Read the full online magazine here
Tags
Brighton
CONNECT49
Jisc
TNC25